Plugins guide updated and new tutorial on operator extra links (#1438)
astronomer/docs: learn/operator-extra-link-tutorial.md

---
title: 'Use a plugin to add extra links to operators'

> sidebar_label: 'Add an operator extra link via plugin'

Reviewer: Wondering if we should make this just "Add an operator extra link" to shorten a bit?

id: operator-extra-link-tutorial
description: 'Use tutorials and guides to make the most out of Airflow and Astronomer.'
---

> You can add custom links to Airflow operators for easy access of related information from the Airflow UI.

Reviewer: I think we should make this a bit more descriptive. It's likely that many users coming to this tutorial will already know what an "extra link" is, but for those who might not maybe we can explain a bit more.

> This tutorial shows how to add extra links using an Airflow plugin. Alternatively extra links can be added to operators when creating an [Airflow provider](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow-providers/index.html).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial shows how to add extra links using an Airflow plugin. Alternatively, extra links can be added to operators when creating an [Airflow provider](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow-providers/index.html).
```
As part of the clarification above, maybe it would be good to note whether this applies to custom operators or pre-built ones (or both). And say a bit more about when you would create a provider to do this - this may not be something most Airflow users have encountered, and probably won't be relevant to many.

After you complete this tutorial, you'll be able to:

- Add a static operator extra link to any operator.
- Modify an existing operator to push an additional value to XCom.
- Add a dynamic operator extra link to any operator.
- Add operator extra links to an Airflow plugin.

## Time to complete

This tutorial takes approximately 1 hour to complete.

## Assumed knowledge

To get the most out of this tutorial, make sure you have an understanding of:

- Navigating an Airflow Project. See [Get started with Apache Airflow](get-started-with-airflow.md).
- Airflow Plugins. See [Import plugins to Airflow](using-airflow-plugins.md).
- Airflow Connections. See [Manage connections in Apache Airflow](connections.md)
- Intermediate knowledge of Python. See [the official Python documentation](https://docs.python.org/3/).

## Prerequisites

- The [Astro CLI](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/install-cli).

> ## Step 1: Create a new Airflow project

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 1: Create an Astro project
```

> Run the `astro dev init` command in an empty folder to create your Airflow project. If this command is not available to you, make sure you correctly installed the [Astro CLI](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/install-cli).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Set up Airflow by creating a new Astro project:

Create a new Astro project:

  ```sh
  $ mkdir astro-extra-link-tutorial && cd astro-extra-link-tutorial
  $ astro dev init
  ```
```
Feel free to adjust, just making this consistent with our other tutorials.

## Step 2: Create a DAG using the SimpleHttpOperator

> As a first step we are going to add a static extra link to the SimpleHttpOperator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First you will add a static extra link to the SimpleHttpOperator.
```

1. Create a new Python file named `plugin_test_dag.py` in the `/dags` folder of your Airflow project.

> 2. Copy paste the following DAG code into your file. It defines a DAG with one tasks that uses the SimpleHttpOperator to post a GET request to the connection defined as `random_user_api_conn`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
2. Copy paste the following DAG code into your file:
```

```python
from airflow import DAG
from airflow.providers.http.operators.http import SimpleHttpOperator
from datetime import datetime

with DAG(
    dag_id="plugin_test_dag",
    start_date=datetime(2022,11,1),
    schedule=None,
    catchup=False
):

    call_api_simple = SimpleHttpOperator(
        task_id="call_api_simple",
        http_conn_id="random_user_api_conn",
        method="GET"
    )
```

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This DAG has one SimpleHttpOperator task that posts a GET request to API provided in the `random_user_api_conn` connection.
```

## Step 3: Add a static operator extra link

> To add an extra link to an operator you will have to create an [Airflow plugin](using-airflow-plugins.md).

Reviewer: Maybe describe here what the extra link will do?

> To add an extra link to an operator you will have to create an [Airflow plugin](using-airflow-plugins.md).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Create an [Airflow plugin](using-airflow-plugins.md) to add an extra link to the operator.
```

class AirflowExtraLinkPlugin(AirflowPlugin):
    name = "extra_link_plugin"
    operator_extra_links = [
        HTTPDocsLink(),
    ]
```

This script accomplishes the following:

- Importing the `AirflowPlugin` class which serves as a base class for custom plugins as well as the `BaseOperatorLink` from which classes defining custom extra links inherit.
- Defining a custom extra link class called `HTTPDocsLink` which inherits from `BaseOperatorLink` and adds an external link button in the Airflow UI to all operators provided to its `operators` attribute. In the example we provide the `SimpleHttpOperator`.
- Providing a static link to the HTTP documentation on Mozilla to the `.get_link()` method of the `HTTPDocsLink`. This method adds any link returned to the link button in Airflow UI.
- Creating the `AirflowExtraLinkPlugin` class which inherits from `AirflowPlugin`. This class will plug objects of [different plugin types](using-airflow-plugins.md) into Airflow. The plugin is given the name `extra_link_plugin` and its `operator_extra_links` attribute contains all extra links objects that have been defined in this plugin script. For now it contains only `HTTPDocsLink()`.

> ## Step 4: View your extra link in the UI

Reviewer: I would break this up into 2 high level steps, one to start the project and create the connection, and then another to run the DAG and view the results. (again to be consistent with how we've formatted some of the other tutorials)

> 1. Run `astro dev start` to start up Airflow. If your Airflow instance is already running use `astro dev restart` to restart it in order to load any changes made in the `/plugins` folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In your terminal, run `astro dev start` to start up Airflow. If your Airflow instance is already running use `astro dev restart` to restart it in order to load any changes made in the `/plugins` folder.
```

2. Add an HTTP connection called `random_user_api_conn` to `http://randomuser.me/api/` in the Airflow UI. This API will return data about a randomly generated user persona. Feel free to use a different API, the content returned will not be relevant for this tutorial. 

![HTTP connection](/img/guides/extra_links_tutorial_add_http_connection.png)

2. Run the `plugins_test_dag`.

3. In the Grid View click on the green square showing the successful run of the `call_api_simple` task. Select the **Details** tab and scroll down to see the extra link button called **HTTP docs**.

![HTTP docs button](/img/guides/extra_links_tutorial_HTTPDocsLink_button.png)

4. Click on the button to visit the HTTP docs on Mozilla.

> ## Step 5: Create a custom CatHttpOperator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 5: Create a custom operator
```
Since the section titles show up in the nav bar I think we should keep them generic. On the off-chance anybody scans them and thinks they don't need a "CatHttpOperator" :)

Linking to relevant docs from an operator is useful, but often you want to add a dynamic link that uses information returned by the operator to decide where to link to. The second half of this tutorial will cover how to modify an operator to push the value you need to [XComs](airflow-passing-data-between-tasks.md) and retrieve that value in your Airflow plugin.

> 1. Go to the `/include` folder of your Airflow project and create a new file called `cat_http.py`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Create a new file called `cat_http.py` in the `include/` folder of your Airflow project.
```

2. Copy the following code into the file.

> ```python

Reviewer: I think the code block should be indented so it shows up under sub-step 2

        http = HttpHook(
            self.method,
            http_conn_id=self.http_conn_id,
            auth_type=self.auth_type,
            tcp_keep_alive=self.tcp_keep_alive,
            tcp_keep_alive_idle=self.tcp_keep_alive_idle,
            tcp_keep_alive_count=self.tcp_keep_alive_count,
            tcp_keep_alive_interval=self.tcp_keep_alive_interval,
        )

        self.log.info("Calling HTTP method")

        response = http.run(
            self.endpoint, self.data, self.headers, self.extra_options
        )
        if self.log_response:
            self.log.info(response.text)
        if self.response_check:
            kwargs = determine_kwargs(self.response_check, [response], context)
            if not self.response_check(response, **kwargs):
                raise AirflowException("Response check returned False.")
        if self.response_filter:
            kwargs = determine_kwargs(self.response_filter, [response], context)
            return self.response_filter(response, **kwargs)

        # pushing the HTTP status response to XComs
        context["ti"].xcom_push(key="status_code", value=response.status_code)

        return response.text
```

> The code above defines a custom slightly modified version of the `SimpleHttpOperator`, called the `CatHttpOperator`. The change consists of adding one line before the `return` statement of the `.execute()` method which is `context["ti"].xcom_push(key="status_code", value=response.status_code)`. This line pushes the `status_code` attribute of the `response` object to XComs and associates it with the key `status_code`. The rest of the `.execute()` method is identical to the parent operator (compare the source code of the [SimpleHttpOperator](https://github.com/apache/airflow/blob/main/airflow/providers/http/operators/http.py)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code above defines a custom version of the `SimpleHttpOperator`, called the `CatHttpOperator`. The change consists of adding one line before the `return` statement of the `.execute()` method which is `context["ti"].xcom_push(key="status_code", value=response.status_code)`. This line pushes the `status_code` attribute of the `response` object to XComs and associates it with the key `status_code`. The rest of the `.execute()` method is identical to the parent operator (compare the source code of the [SimpleHttpOperator](https://github.com/apache/airflow/blob/main/airflow/providers/http/operators/http.py)).
```
Same here, this should also be indented

3. Add an empty Python file with the name `__init__.py` to your `/include` folder to allow module imports from the folder.

This is all that is necessary to modify an existing operator.

:::info

> Before Airflow 2.0 custom operators and hooks were added as plugins. This pattern has been deprecated and custom operators and hooks can now be simply by importing a script located in `/include`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before Airflow 2.0, custom operators and hooks were added as plugins. This pattern has been deprecated and custom operators and hooks can now be simply by importing a script located in `/include`.
```
I think we have a guide on importing custom hooks and operators that we could link to here?

:::

> ## Step 6: Use the CatHttpOperator in your DAG

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 6: Create a DAG with your custom operator
```

> 1. In the `/dags` folder import the `CatHttpOperator` by adding the import statement:

Reviewer: I would start this section by telling them to create a new file. Unless you want them to update the DAG from above, in which case say that

```python
from include.cat_http import CatHttpOperator
```

2. Create a second task in the DAG using the new operator.

```python
call_api_cat = CatHttpOperator(
        task_id="call_api_cat",

>         http_conn_id="randomuser_api",

Reviewer: ```suggestion
        http_conn_id="random_user_api_conn",
```

        method="GET"
)
```

This task will post the same GET request to the API you defined with the connection ID `randomuser_api` as the first task, but this time using the `CatHttpOperator`.

> ## Step 7: See the modified XComs

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 7: Run your DAG and view modified XComs
```

> 1. Run the `plugins_test_dag`, which now consists of two tasks again. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. Run the `plugins_test_dag`, which now consists of two tasks. 
```

2. Select the latest run of the `call_api_cat` task in the Grid view and click on the **XCom** tab to view XComs returned by this task.

> ![XCom tab](/img/guides/extra_links_tutorial_xcom_tab.png)

Reviewer: indent here

> ![XCom tab](/img/guides/extra_links_tutorial_xcom_tab.png)

Reviewer: You might want to circle the status_code in the screenshot. I was looking for it in the long return value text 🤦‍♀️

> 3. Verify that the XCom for this task instance contain an entry for `status_code`. In the screenshot below the HTTP status code returned was 200.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Verify that the XCom for this task instance contains an entry for `status_code`. In the screenshot below the HTTP status code returned was 200.
```

> ![HTTP status code returned](/img/guides/extra_links_tutorial_http_code.png)

Reviewer: and indent here

> ## Step 8: Add a dynamic extra link to the CatHttpOperator

Reviewer: ```suggestion
## Step 8: Add a dynamic extra link to your custom operator
```

Next, you will define a second extra link.

1. Open `my_extra_link_plugin.py` in your `/plugins` folder.

2. Add the following import statements:

```python
from include.cat_http import CatHttpOperator
from airflow.models import XCom
```

> 3. Copy paste the following code which creates a class called `CatLink` derived from `BaseOperatorLink`.

Reviewer: I would be clear that you need to add this class above the `AirflowExtraPlugin` class, otherwise `Catlink()` won't be defined (I initially just pasted it at the bottom of the script).

```python
class CatLink(BaseOperatorLink):
    # name the link button in the UI
    name = "HTTP cat"

    # add the button to one or more operators
    operators = [CatHttpOperator]

    # provide the link
    def get_link(self, operator, *, ti_key=None):
        status_code = XCom.get_value(key="status_code", ti_key=ti_key) or ""
        return f"https://http.cat/{status_code}"
```

The code in the `.get_link()` method retrieves the `status_code` you pushed to XCom and appends it to the [HTTP cat Api link](https://http.cat/).

> 4. Add the new link to the `operator_extra_links` list i the `AirflowExtraLinkPlugin` class.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
4. Update the `operator_extra_links` list in the `AirflowExtraLinkPlugin` class with the new `CatLink()`. The class should look like this:
```
Trying to make it clear that we're updating the existing code, but providing the entire class again.

```python
class AirflowExtraLinkPlugin(AirflowPlugin):
    name = "extra_link_plugin"
    operator_extra_links = [
        CatLink(), # add this line
        HTTPDocsLink()
    ]
```

> 5. Save the file and restart your Airflow instance.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
5. Save the file and restart your Airflow instance with `astro dev restart`.
```

---
title: 'Use a plugin to add extra links to operators'
sidebar_label: 'Add an operator extra link'
id: operator-extra-link-tutorial
description: 'Use tutorials and guides to make the most out of Airflow and Astronomer.'
---

> Airflow offers the possibility to customize its UI with plugins. One small but impactful addition that is easy to make are extra links in the Details view of both existing and custom operators. These operator extra links can both point to static websites, for example to access documentation relevant to the operator or contain dynamic links created from information during the task instance run. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Airflow offers the possibility to customize its UI with plugins. One small but impactful addition is adding extra links in the **Details** view of either existing or custom operators. These operator extra links can point to static websites, for example to access documentation relevant to the operator, or dynamic links created from information during the task instance run. 
```
This description is much better! What do we think of also adding a screenshot of the details view here circling an extra link?

> This tutorial shows how to add both static and dynamic extra links using an Airflow plugin. Alternatively, extra links can be added to operators when creating an [Airflow provider](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow-providers/index.html). In general adding an operator extra link via plugin is easier for use in a limited number of Airflow instances while it is recommended to consider adding them to an Airflow provider if you are planning to use them in a larger number of deployments and in combination with other changes to core Airflow. You can add operator extra links to both, existing operators and custom ones.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This tutorial shows how to add both static and dynamic extra links using an Airflow plugin.
```

After you complete this tutorial, you'll be able to:

- Add a static operator extra link to any operator.
- Modify an existing operator to push an additional value to XCom.
- Add a dynamic operator extra link to any operator.

> - Add operator extra links to an Airflow plugin.

Reviewer: Is this last bullet actually something different than bullets one and three? Or just saying that's _how_ you add the extra link? If the latter I would remove it and add "using an Airflow plugin" to the ends of bullets one and three.

> 

Reviewer: :::tip

Extra links can be also be added to operators when creating an [Airflow provider](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow-providers/index.html). In general, adding an operator extra link via plugin as described in this tutorial is easier for use in a limited number of Airflow instances. However, if you are planning to use the extra link in a large number of deployments, consider adding them to an Airflow provider instead. 

:::

## Time to complete

This tutorial takes approximately 1 hour to complete.

## Assumed knowledge

To get the most out of this tutorial, make sure you have an understanding of:

- Navigating an Airflow Project. See [Get started with Apache Airflow](get-started-with-airflow.md).
- Airflow Plugins. See [Import plugins to Airflow](using-airflow-plugins.md).
- Airflow Connections. See [Manage connections in Apache Airflow](connections.md)
- Intermediate knowledge of Python. See [the official Python documentation](https://docs.python.org/3/).

## Prerequisites

- The [Astro CLI](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/install-cli).

## Step 1: Create an Astro project

Set up Airflow by creating a new Astro project:

> Create a new Astro project:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

    ```sh
    $ mkdir astro-extra-link-tutorial && cd astro-extra-link-tutorial
    $ astro dev init
    ```

## Step 2: Create a DAG using the SimpleHttpOperator

> First you will add a static operator extra link to the SimpleHttpOperator which will add a button with a link to the [Mozilla HTTP documentation](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP) to every task instance created by this operator.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
First you will add a static operator extra link to the SimpleHttpOperator, which will link to the [Mozilla HTTP documentation](https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP) on every task instance created by this operator.
```

## Step 3: Add a static operator extra link

Create an [Airflow plugin](using-airflow-plugins.md) to add an extra link to the operator.

1. Create a new Python file named `my_extra_link_plugin.py` in the `plugins` folder of your Airflow project. 

2. Copy paste the following code into your file.

    ```python
    from airflow.plugins_manager import AirflowPlugin
    from airflow.models.baseoperator import BaseOperatorLink
    from airflow.providers.http.operators.http import SimpleHttpOperator

    # define the extra link
    class HTTPDocsLink(BaseOperatorLink):
        # name the link button in the UI
        name = "HTTP docs"

        # add the button to one or more operators
        operators = [SimpleHttpOperator]

        # provide the link
        def get_link(self, operator, *, ti_key=None):
            return "https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP"

    # define the plugin class
    class AirflowExtraLinkPlugin(AirflowPlugin):
        name = "extra_link_plugin"
        operator_extra_links = [
            HTTPDocsLink(),
        ]
    ```

This script accomplishes the following:

> - Importing the `AirflowPlugin` class which serves as a base class for custom plugins as well as the `BaseOperatorLink` from which classes defining custom extra links inherit.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Import the `AirflowPlugin` class which serves as a base class for custom plugins as well as the `BaseOperatorLink` from which classes defining custom extra links inherit.
```

> - Defining a custom extra link class called `HTTPDocsLink` which inherits from `BaseOperatorLink` and adds an external link button in the Airflow UI to all operators provided to its `operators` attribute. In the example we provide the `SimpleHttpOperator`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Define a custom extra link class called `HTTPDocsLink` which inherits from `BaseOperatorLink` and adds an external link button in the Airflow UI to all operators provided to its `operators` attribute. In the example, we provide the `SimpleHttpOperator`.
```

> - Providing a static link to the HTTP documentation on Mozilla to the `.get_link()` method of the `HTTPDocsLink`. This method adds any link returned to the link button in Airflow UI.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Provide a static link to the HTTP documentation on Mozilla to the `.get_link()` method of the `HTTPDocsLink`. This method adds any link returned to the link button in Airflow UI.
```

> - Creating the `AirflowExtraLinkPlugin` class which inherits from `AirflowPlugin`. This class will plug objects of [different plugin types](using-airflow-plugins.md) into Airflow. The plugin is given the name `extra_link_plugin` and its `operator_extra_links` attribute contains all extra links objects that have been defined in this plugin script. For now it contains only `HTTPDocsLink()`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- Create the `AirflowExtraLinkPlugin` class which inherits from `AirflowPlugin`. This class will plug objects of [different plugin types](using-airflow-plugins.md) into Airflow. The plugin is given the name `extra_link_plugin` and its `operator_extra_links` attribute contains all extra links objects that have been defined in this plugin script. For now it contains only `HTTPDocsLink()`.
```

## Step 4: Add an HTTP connection

> 1. In your terminal, run `astro dev start` in your Astro project directory to start up Airflow. If your Airflow instance is already running use `astro dev restart` to restart it in order to load any changes made in the `plugins` folder.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
1. In your terminal, run `astro dev start` in your Astro project directory to start up Airflow. If your Airflow instance is already running, use `astro dev restart` to restart it in order to load any changes made in the `plugins` folder.
```

2. Add an HTTP connection called `random_user_api_conn` to `http://randomuser.me/api/` in the Airflow UI. This API will return data about a randomly generated user persona. Feel free to use a different API, the content returned will not be relevant for this tutorial.

    ![HTTP connection](/img/guides/extra_links_tutorial_add_http_connection.png)

## Step 5: Use your static operator extra link

1. Run the `plugins_test_dag`.

2. In the Grid View click on the green square showing the successful run of the `call_api_simple` task. Select the **Details** tab and scroll down to see the extra link button called **HTTP docs**.

>     ![HTTP docs button](/img/guides/extra_links_tutorial_HTTPDocsLink_button.png)

Reviewer: Maybe circle the link in this screenshot?

                auth_type=self.auth_type,
                tcp_keep_alive=self.tcp_keep_alive,
                tcp_keep_alive_idle=self.tcp_keep_alive_idle,
                tcp_keep_alive_count=self.tcp_keep_alive_count,
                tcp_keep_alive_interval=self.tcp_keep_alive_interval,
            )

            self.log.info("Calling HTTP method")

            response = http.run(
                self.endpoint, self.data, self.headers, self.extra_options
            )
            if self.log_response:
                self.log.info(response.text)
            if self.response_check:
                kwargs = determine_kwargs(self.response_check, [response], context)
                if not self.response_check(response, **kwargs):
                    raise AirflowException("Response check returned False.")
            if self.response_filter:
                kwargs = determine_kwargs(self.response_filter, [response], context)
                return self.response_filter(response, **kwargs)

            # pushing the HTTP status response to XComs
            context["ti"].xcom_push(key="status_code", value=response.status_code)

            return response.text
    ```

>     The code above defines a custom version of the `SimpleHttpOperator`, called the `CatHttpOperator`. The change consists of adding one line before the `return` statement of the `.execute()` method which is `context["ti"].xcom_push(key="status_code", value=response.status_code)`. This line pushes the `status_code` attribute of the `response` object to XComs and associates it with the key `status_code`. The rest of the `.execute()` method is identical to the parent operator (compare the source code of the [SimpleHttpOperator](https://github.com/apache/airflow/blob/main/airflow/providers/http/operators/http.py)).

Reviewer: ```suggestion
The code above defines a custom version of the `SimpleHttpOperator`, called the `CatHttpOperator`. The change consists of adding one line before the `return` statement of the `.execute()` method which is `context["ti"].xcom_push(key="status_code", value=response.status_code)`. This line pushes the `status_code` attribute of the `response` object to XComs and associates it with the key `status_code`. The rest of the `.execute()` method is identical to the parent operator (compare the source code of the [SimpleHttpOperator](https://github.com/apache/airflow/blob/main/airflow/providers/http/operators/http.py)).
```

3. Add an empty Python file with the name `__init__.py` to your `include` folder to allow module imports from the folder.

This is all that is necessary to modify an existing operator.

:::info

> Before Airflow 2.0, custom operators and hooks were added as plugins. This pattern has been deprecated and [custom operators and hooks](airflow-importing-custom-hooks-operators.md) can now be simply by importing a script located in `include`.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Before Airflow 2.0, custom operators and hooks were added as plugins. This pattern has been deprecated and [custom operators and hooks](airflow-importing-custom-hooks-operators.md) can now be used simply by importing a script located in `include`.
```

:::

## Step 7: Create a DAG with your custom operator

1. In the `plugin_test_dag.py` file import the `CatHttpOperator` by adding the following import statement at the start of the code:

    ```python
    from include.cat_http import CatHttpOperator
    ```

2. Create a second task in the existing DAG context using the new operator with the code snippet below.

    ```python
    call_api_cat = CatHttpOperator(

>             task_id="call_api_cat",

Reviewer: Looks like things are double-indented here?

---
title: 'Use a plugin to add extra links to operators'
sidebar_label: 'Add an operator extra link'
id: operator-extra-link-tutorial
description: 'Use tutorials and guides to make the most out of Airflow and Astronomer.'
---

Airflow offers the possibility to customize its UI with plugins. One small but impactful addition is adding extra links in the **Details** view of either existing or custom operators. These operator extra links can point to static websites, for example to access documentation relevant to the operator, or dynamic links created from information during the task instance run. 

![BashOperator with extra link](/img/guides/extra_links_tutorial_bashoperator.png)

This tutorial shows how to add both static and dynamic extra links using an Airflow plugin.

After you complete this tutorial, you'll be able to:

- Add a static operator extra link to any operator using an Airflow plugin.
- Modify an existing operator to push an additional value to XCom.
- Add a dynamic operator extra link to any operator using an Airflow plugin.

:::tip

> Extra links can be also be added to operators when creating an [Airflow provider](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow-providers/index.html). In general, adding an operator extra link via plugin as described in this tutorial is easier for use in a limited number of Airflow instances. However, if you are planning to use the extra link in a large number of deployments, consider adding them to an Airflow provider instead.

Author: It is now a second tab to step 9 called "using a provider". :)

## Step 3: Add a static operator extra link

Create an [Airflow plugin](using-airflow-plugins.md) to add an extra link to the operator.

1. Create a new Python file named `my_extra_link_plugin.py` in the `plugins` folder of your Airflow project. 

2. Copy paste the following code into your file.

    ```python
    from airflow.plugins_manager import AirflowPlugin
    from airflow.models.baseoperator import BaseOperatorLink
    from airflow.providers.http.operators.http import SimpleHttpOperator

    # define the extra link
    class HTTPDocsLink(BaseOperatorLink):
        # name the link button in the UI
        name = "HTTP docs"

        # add the button to one or more operators
        operators = [SimpleHttpOperator]

        # provide the link
        def get_link(self, operator, *, ti_key=None):
            return "https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP"

    # define the plugin class
    class AirflowExtraLinkPlugin(AirflowPlugin):
        name = "extra_link_plugin"
        operator_extra_links = [
            HTTPDocsLink(),
        ]
    ```

This script accomplishes the following:

> - Import the `AirflowPlugin` class which serves as a base class for custom plugins as well as the `BaseOperatorLink` from which classes defining custom extra links inherit.

Reviewer 2: "Imports" and similar changes in other lines to match the tense of "This script accomplishes..."

- Define a custom extra link class called `HTTPDocsLink` which inherits from `BaseOperatorLink` and adds an external link button in the Airflow UI to all operators provided to its `operators` attribute. In the example, we provide the `SimpleHttpOperator`.

> - Provide a static link to the HTTP documentation on Mozilla to the `.get_link()` method of the `HTTPDocsLink`. This method adds any link returned to the link button in Airflow UI.

Reviewer 2: in the Airflow UI

        name = "HTTP cat"

        # add the button to one or more operators
        operators = [CatHttpOperator]

        # provide the link
        def get_link(self, operator, *, ti_key=None):
            status_code = XCom.get_value(key="status_code", ti_key=ti_key) or ""
            return f"https://http.cat/{status_code}"
    ```

    The code in the `.get_link()` method retrieves the `status_code` you pushed to XCom and appends it to the [HTTP cat Api link](https://http.cat/).

4. Update the `operator_extra_links` list in the `AirflowExtraLinkPlugin` class with the new `CatLink()`. The class should look like this:

    ```python
    class AirflowExtraLinkPlugin(AirflowPlugin):
        name = "extra_link_plugin"
        operator_extra_links = [
            CatLink(), # add this line
            HTTPDocsLink()
        ]
    ```

5. Save the file and restart your Airflow instance with `astro dev restart`.

## Step 10: See your new extra link in action

Your second extra link has now been added to the CatHttpOperator.

1. In the Airflow UI, run `plugins_test_dag` again. 

2. Navigate to the Graph View and click on the `call_api_cat` task. 

> 3. Click the Http Cat button to find the response your last API call got illustrated with a fitting cat.

Reviewer 2: response of & maybe call is instead of call got

1. Create a new Python file named `my_extra_link_plugin.py` in the `plugins` folder of your Airflow project. 

2. Copy paste the following code into your file.

    ```python
    from airflow.plugins_manager import AirflowPlugin
    from airflow.models.baseoperator import BaseOperatorLink
    from airflow.providers.http.operators.http import SimpleHttpOperator

    # define the extra link
    class HTTPDocsLink(BaseOperatorLink):
        # name the link button in the UI
        name = "HTTP docs"

        # add the button to one or more operators
        operators = [SimpleHttpOperator]

        # provide the link
        def get_link(self, operator, *, ti_key=None):
            return "https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP"

    # define the plugin class
    class AirflowExtraLinkPlugin(AirflowPlugin):
        name = "extra_link_plugin"
        operator_extra_links = [
            HTTPDocsLink(),
        ]
    ```

This script accomplishes the following:

- Defines an operator extra link called `HTTPDocsLink` which will create an extra link button with the name `HTTP docs`. Customize this string to change the name on the button displayed in the UI.

> - Adds the `SimpleHttpOperator` to the list of operators this extra link will be applied to. You can add as many operators as you'd like, inlcuding custom operators.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
- Adds the `SimpleHttpOperator` to the list of operators this extra link will be applied to. You can add as many operators as you'd like, including custom operators.
```

## Step 4: Add an HTTP connection

1. Run `astro dev start` in your Astro project directory to start up Airflow. If your Airflow instance is already running, use `astro dev restart` to restart it in order to load any changes made in the `plugins` folder.

2. Add an HTTP connection called `random_user_api_conn` to `http://randomuser.me/api/` in the Airflow UI. This API will return data about a randomly generated user persona. Feel free to use a different API, the content returned will not be relevant for this tutorial. Learn more about connections in the [Manage connections in Apache Airflow](connections.md) guide.

    ![HTTP connection](/img/guides/extra_links_tutorial_add_http_connection.png)

## Step 5: Use your static operator extra link

1. Run the `plugins_test_dag`.

2. In the **Grid** view, click the green square representing the successful run of the `call_api_simple` task. Select the **Details** tab and scroll down to see the extra link button called **HTTP docs**.

    ![HTTP docs button](/img/guides/extra_links_tutorial_HTTPDocsLink_button.png)

3. Click on the button to visit the HTTP docs on Mozilla.

## Step 6: Create a custom operator

> Another core feature of extra links is that you can dynamically generate them based information returned by an operator at run time. The second half of this tutorial will cover how to modify an operator to push the value you need to [XComs](airflow-passing-data-between-tasks.md) and retrieve that value for use in an extra link.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
Another core feature of extra links is that you can dynamically generate them based on information returned by an operator at run time. The second half of this tutorial will cover how to modify an operator to push the value you need to [XComs](airflow-passing-data-between-tasks.md) and retrieve that value for use in an extra link.
```

---

> title: 'Use a plugin to add extra links to operators'

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
title: 'Customize Apache Airflow operators in the Airflow UI'
```

sidebar_label: 'Add an operator extra link'
id: operator-extra-link-tutorial
description: 'Learn how to add operator extra links using a plugin.'
---

import Tabs from '@theme/Tabs';
import TabItem from '@theme/TabItem';

Airflow offers the possibility to customize its UI with plugins. One small but impactful addition is adding extra links in the **Details** view of either existing or custom operators. These operator extra links can point to static websites, for example to access documentation relevant to the operator, or dynamic links created from information during the task instance run. 

![BashOperator with extra link](/img/guides/extra_links_tutorial_bashoperator.png)

> This tutorial shows how to add both static and dynamic extra links using an Airflow plugin, as well as how to add an extra link directly in a custom operator.

Author: I changed this sentence slightly because the second half was referring to a deleted part that talked about how to add the extra link within a provider.

After you complete this tutorial, you'll be able to:

- Add a static operator extra link to any operator using an Airflow plugin.
- Modify an existing operator to push an additional value to XCom.
- Add a dynamic operator extra link to any operator using an Airflow plugin.
- Add an operator extra link to a custom operator defined in an Airflow provider.

> :::tip

Author: Moved and merged the two tips that talk about this.

## Step 3: Add a static operator extra link

Create an [Airflow plugin](using-airflow-plugins.md) to add an extra link to the operator.

1. Create a new Python file named `my_extra_link_plugin.py` in the `plugins` folder of your Airflow project. 

2. Copy paste the following code into your file.

    ```python
    from airflow.plugins_manager import AirflowPlugin
    from airflow.models.baseoperator import BaseOperatorLink
    from airflow.providers.http.operators.http import SimpleHttpOperator

    # define the extra link
    class HTTPDocsLink(BaseOperatorLink):
        # name the link button in the UI
        name = "HTTP docs"

        # add the button to one or more operators
        operators = [SimpleHttpOperator]

        # provide the link
        def get_link(self, operator, *, ti_key=None):
            return "https://developer.mozilla.org/en-US/docs/Web/HTTP"

    # define the plugin class
    class AirflowExtraLinkPlugin(AirflowPlugin):
        name = "extra_link_plugin"
        operator_extra_links = [
            HTTPDocsLink(),
        ]
    ```

> This script accomplishes the following:

Author: That is a good point. I changed the section to be more action oriented :)

                    raise AirflowException("Response check returned False.")
            if self.response_filter:
                kwargs = determine_kwargs(self.response_filter, [response], context)
                return self.response_filter(response, **kwargs)

            # pushing the HTTP status response to XComs
            context["ti"].xcom_push(key="status_code", value=response.status_code)

            return response.text
    ```

    The code above defines a custom version of the `SimpleHttpOperator`, called the `CatHttpOperator`. The change consists of adding one line before the `return` statement of the `.execute()` method which is `context["ti"].xcom_push(key="status_code", value=response.status_code)`. This line pushes the `status_code` attribute of the `response` object to XComs and associates it with the key `status_code`. The rest of the `.execute()` method is identical to the parent operator (compare the source code of the [SimpleHttpOperator](https://github.com/apache/airflow/blob/main/airflow/providers/http/operators/http.py)).

3. Add an empty Python file with the name `__init__.py` to your `include` folder to allow module imports from the folder.

> This is all that is necessary to modify an existing operator.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```

> :::info
> 
> Before Airflow 2.0, custom operators and hooks were added as plugins. This pattern has been deprecated and [custom operators and hooks](airflow-importing-custom-hooks-operators.md) can now be used simply by importing a script located in `include`.
> 
> :::

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
```
I think it's okay to assume 2.0+ here, especially because we tell users to start a new project

        http_conn_id="random_user_api_conn",
        method="GET"
    )
    ```

This task will post the same GET request to the API you defined with the connection ID `randomuser_api` as the first task, but this time using the `CatHttpOperator`.

## Step 8: Run your DAG and view modified XComs

1. Run the `plugins_test_dag`, which now consists of two tasks. 

2. Select the latest run of the `call_api_cat` task in the Grid view and click on the **XCom** tab to view XComs returned by this task.

    ![XCom tab](/img/guides/extra_links_tutorial_xcom_tab.png)

3. Verify that the XCom for this task instance contains an entry for `status_code`. In the screenshot below the HTTP status code returned was 200.

    ![HTTP status code returned](/img/guides/extra_links_tutorial_http_code.png)

## Step 9: Add a dynamic extra link to your custom operator

Next, you will create a dynamic extra link using an Airflow plugin by following these steps:

1. Open `my_extra_link_plugin.py` in your `plugins` folder.

2. Add the following import statements at the start of the file:

    ```python
    from include.cat_http import CatHttpOperator
    from airflow.models import XCom
    ```

> 3. Copy paste the following code which creates a class called `CatLink` derived from `BaseOperatorLink` and paste it below the definition of the `HTTPDocsLink` class and above the definition of the `AirflowExtraLinkPlugin` class.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
3. Copy paste the following code below the definition of the `HTTPDocsLink` class and above the definition of the `AirflowExtraLinkPlugin` class. 
```

    ```python
    class CatLink(BaseOperatorLink):
        # name the link button in the UI
        name = "HTTP cat"

        # add the button to one or more operators
        operators = [CatHttpOperator]

        # provide the link
        def get_link(self, operator, *, ti_key=None):
            status_code = XCom.get_value(key="status_code", ti_key=ti_key) or ""
            return f"https://http.cat/{status_code}"
    ```

>     The code in the `.get_link()` method retrieves the `status_code` you pushed to XCom and appends it to the [HTTP cat Api link](https://http.cat/).

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
    This code creates a class called `CatLink` derived from `BaseOperatorLink`. The `.get_link()` method retrieves the `status_code` you pushed to XCom and appends it to the [HTTP cat Api link](https://http.cat/).
```

:::tip

Extra links can be also be added to operators when creating an [Airflow provider](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow-providers/index.html). In general, adding an operator extra link via plugin as described in this tutorial is easier for use in a limited number of Airflow instances. However, if you are planning to use the extra link in a large number of deployments, consider adding them to an Airflow provider instead.

:::

## Time to complete

This tutorial takes approximately 1 hour to complete.

## Assumed knowledge

To get the most out of this tutorial, make sure you have an understanding of:

- Navigating an Airflow Project. See [Get started with Apache Airflow](get-started-with-airflow.md).
- Airflow Plugins. See [Import plugins to Airflow](using-airflow-plugins.md).
- Airflow Connections. See [Manage connections in Apache Airflow](connections.md).
- Intermediate knowledge of Python. See [the official Python documentation](https://docs.python.org/3/).

## Prerequisites

- The [Astro CLI](https://docs.astronomer.io/astro/cli/install-cli).

## Step 1: Create an Astro project

Set up Airflow by creating a new Astro project:

>     ```sh

Reviewer: ```suggestion
    ```text
```
I don't think 'sh' is an option that renders - I'm seeing the ticks displayed in the code box in the deploy preview.

Reviewer 3: This is because you don't need to indent the code fence unless it's part of a step. Setting this back to the beginning of the line should do the trick!

                auth_type=self.auth_type,
                tcp_keep_alive=self.tcp_keep_alive,
                tcp_keep_alive_idle=self.tcp_keep_alive_idle,
                tcp_keep_alive_count=self.tcp_keep_alive_count,
                tcp_keep_alive_interval=self.tcp_keep_alive_interval,
            )

            self.log.info("Calling HTTP method")

            response = http.run(
                self.endpoint, self.data, self.headers, self.extra_options
            )
            if self.log_response:
                self.log.info(response.text)
            if self.response_check:
                kwargs = determine_kwargs(self.response_check, [response], context)
                if not self.response_check(response, **kwargs):
                    raise AirflowException("Response check returned False.")
            if self.response_filter:
                kwargs = determine_kwargs(self.response_filter, [response], context)
                return self.response_filter(response, **kwargs)

            # pushing the HTTP status response to XComs
            context["ti"].xcom_push(key="status_code", value=response.status_code)

            return response.text
    ```

> The code above defines a custom version of the `SimpleHttpOperator`, called the `CatHttpOperator`. The change consists of adding one line before the `return` statement of the `.execute()` method which is `context["ti"].xcom_push(key="status_code", value=response.status_code)`. This line pushes the `status_code` attribute of the `response` object to XComs and associates it with the key `status_code`. The rest of the `.execute()` method is identical to the parent operator (compare the source code of the [SimpleHttpOperator](https://github.com/apache/airflow/blob/main/airflow/providers/http/operators/http.py)).

Reviewer: This paragraph should be indented so it renders under sub-step 2.

    ```python
    class CatLink(BaseOperatorLink):
        # name the link button in the UI
        name = "HTTP cat"

        # add the button to one or more operators
        operators = [CatHttpOperator]

        # provide the link
        def get_link(self, operator, *, ti_key=None):
            status_code = XCom.get_value(key="status_code", ti_key=ti_key) or ""
            return f"https://http.cat/{status_code}"
    ```

    The code in the `.get_link()` method retrieves the `status_code` you pushed to XCom and appends it to the [HTTP cat Api link](https://http.cat/).

4. Update the `operator_extra_links` list in the `AirflowExtraLinkPlugin` class with the new `CatLink()`. The class should look like this:

    ```python
    class AirflowExtraLinkPlugin(AirflowPlugin):
        name = "extra_link_plugin"
        operator_extra_links = [
            CatLink(), # add this line
            HTTPDocsLink()
        ]
    ```

5. Save the file and restart your Airflow instance with `astro dev restart`.

</TabItem>

<TabItem value="provider">

To add the dynamic operator extra link directly to an operator in a provider package, follow these steps:

> 1. Add `cat_http.py` to your provider package. 

Reviewer: I'm not sure users here will know what it means to add the file to their provider package? Is there documentation on creating a provider we could link out to here?

        # provide the link
        def get_link(self, operator, *, ti_key=None):
            status_code = XCom.get_value(key="status_code", ti_key=ti_key) or ""
            return f"https://http.cat/{status_code}"
    ```

    The code in the `.get_link()` method retrieves the `status_code` you pushed to XCom and appends it to the [HTTP cat Api link](https://http.cat/).

4. Add the operator extra link in your custom operator. To do so simply add the following line in the class definiton of the `CatHttpOperator` above the `.__init__()` method:

    ```python
    operator_extra_links=[CatLink()]
    ```

5. Make sure all provider package files exist in the interpreter's `site-packages` folder.

:::info

You can learn more about how to create your own Airflow provider package in the [official Airflow documentation](https://airflow.apache.org/docs/apache-airflow-providers/#how-to-create-your-own-provider).

:::

</TabItem>
</Tabs>

## Step 10: See your new extra link in action

Your second extra link has now been added to the CatHttpOperator.

1. In the Airflow UI, run `plugins_test_dag` again. 

2. Navigate to the Graph View and click on the `call_api_cat` task. 

> 3. Click the Http Cat button to find the response of your last API call is illustrated with a fitting cat.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
3. Click the HTTP Cat button to find the response of your last API call illustrated with a fitting cat.
```
